JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Lacking votes,
House Republicans delay
Thursday's planned
vote to repeal and replace
Obamacare.
Then: calls for an independent
investigation
after the Republican chairman of
the House
Intelligence Committee goes
directly to the
White House with a report of
surveillance
on President Trump.
And Making Sense and making
money, online
betting's fascination with
President Donald
Trump.
PADDY POWER, Paddy Power:
There's 100 open
bets on Trump, different markets
on Trump
at the moment. The politics
trader literally
can't handle the volume, so
we're hiring a
Trump betting expert at the
moment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: In a setback for
President
Trump and congressional
Republicans, the plan
to hold a vote in the House of
Representatives
this evening on a replacement
for the Affordable
Care Act, also known as
Obamacare, has been
delayed.
We have reporters at both the
White House
and Capitol Hill on today's
frenzied efforts
to win over GOP holdouts.
Let's start with Lisa Desjardins
at the Capitol.
LISA DESJARDINS: At the U.S.
Capitol, the
day began with empty space, the
room where
Republicans had hoped to hold a
meeting of
all their members, and an empty
podium, where
Speaker Paul Ryan's usual
lunchtime news conference
was delayed.
Rules Committee Chairman Pete
Sessions explained
in an unusually blunt update
about the GOP
leaders' health care bill.
REP. PETE SESSIONS (R), Texas:
We think we
have to make changes, but today
we are here
right now to say I don't have
all those answers.
LISA DESJARDINS: And Republicans
also didn't
have the votes. And so, yet
again, members
of the conservative House
Freedom Caucus went
to the White House to negotiate
with President
Trump. They had already won
concessions over
the weekend. The bill would cut
Medicaid spending
by at least $880 billion over
the next decade,
and now gives states the option
of cutting
Medicaid further, by possibly
adding work
requirements.
It also gives a lump tax credit
to recipients,
based largely on age. and it
would also end
the taxes in the Affordable Care
Act immediately.
But conservatives pressed for
additional changes
today. Specifically, they want
the bill to
cut the so-called essential
health benefits
guaranteed by Obamacare. That
would mean insurers
would no longer have to provide
coverage in
areas like mental health,
maternity and prescription
drugs.
But when the Freedom Caucus
returned from
the Capitol, swarmed by media...
QUESTION: Are you a yes yet?
MAN: No, I'm not going to
address that.
LISA DESJARDINS: There was no
deal yet and
the first indications that there
wouldn't
be a vote either.
Michigan's Justin Amash:
REP. JUSTIN AMASH (R), Michigan:
We always
try to get to yes, but I think
it would be
mistake to move forward today.
QUESTION: Not today?
LISA DESJARDINS: Freedom Caucus
Chairman Mark
Meadows:
REP. MARK MEADOWS (R), North
Carolina: I am
still a no at this time. I am
desperately
trying to get to yes. And I
think the president
knows that. I told him that
personally.
LISA DESJARDINS: But the White
House was also
negotiating with moderate
Republicans, who
openly oppose some of the
changes for conservatives
and the bill itself.
As Republicans faced two
internal fronts,
Democrats stayed on the attack.
REP. NANCY PELOSI (D-CA), House
Minority Leader:
Donald Trump may be a great
negotiator. Rookie's
error for bringing this up on a
day you clearly
were not ready.
LISA DESJARDINS: House Minority
Leader Nancy
Pelosi made Republicans a kind
of offer.
REP. NANCY PELOSI: If this bill
were to fail
today, rookie day, I would I --
I stand ready
to negotiate with them on how we
can go forward,
incorporating some of their
ideas. This is
a bad day for them. It's bad if
they win and
it's bad if they lose.
LISA DESJARDINS: The view from
the White House
podium could not have been more
different.
The president's spokesman, Sean
Spicer:
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary:
We have been very clear about
this is a priority
of ours and we worked with them.
But, again,
I go back to at the end of the
day we can't
make people vote.
LISA DESJARDINS: And at the end
of the day,
neither could Republican
leadership, pushing
off the vote until at least
tomorrow.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Lisa is with
us now live
from the Capitol. And she's
joined by John
Yang, who is at the White House.
So, Lisa, how certain are they
that this vote
will be tomorrow?
LISA DESJARDINS: They're not
certain.
In fact, the House, the man in
charge of scheduling,
House Majority Leader Kevin
McCarthy, is only
saying that he hopes this vote
will happen
tomorrow. Tonight, the full
House Republican
Conference will meet, Judy. We
will have an
idea after that roughly of where
things stand.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, John, what
are they saying
at the White House? This
afternoon, the press
secretary, Sean Spicer, was
sounding confident
this vote was coming, that they
had the votes.
That didn't work out.
JOHN YANG: Well, Judy, they
still say they
are confident when the vote
takes place, what
whenever that may be, they will
have the votes.
But it's clear behind the scenes
that they
don't. They aren't there yet.
The president
is working the phones, we're
told. He was
working the phones until
midnight last night.
He had meetings today, as Lisa
reported, with
both conservatives and
moderates. They are
still working to get the votes
to get it through
the House. And, of course, after
they do that,
then they have got to work to
get it through
the Senate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Lisa, pick
up on that.
I mean, talk about this, really
a dilemma
the Republican leadership is
faced with. They
are trying to appeal both to
moderates and
to conservatives at the same
time, and each
side wants something different.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
Initially, House leaders thought
they could
offer something to conservatives
that wouldn't
be a problem for moderates. But
they have
gone past that point. Now, for
everything
they offer conservatives, every
essential
health benefit, for example,
that may come
out of this bill in some form,
that is something
that moderates see as a loss for
their constituents.
Moderates are worried about
coverage. Everyone
is worried about coverage. Let's
say this.
But, as a matter of priorities,
moderates
are worried about coverage and
people covered.
The conservatives are worried
about how much
government is involved, how much
government
is spending here.
And so every dime that you take
off the table,
moderates see that as a coverage
loss. And
that's a real dilemma for
Republicans.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, if it is a
dilemma for
Republicans on the Hill, John,
it's certainly
a problem for the White House.
How are they
approaching this divided set of
needs or demands
coming from Republican members?
JOHN YANG: Well, you know, the
president is
not an ideological president.
He's less worried
about the ideological issues
here. He's worried
about getting to yes, getting to
the votes
they need to get this through
Congress.
The message that you are hearing
from the
White House is that the House
Republicans,
recalcitrant House Republicans ,
is, this
is something you campaigned on,
this is something
you promised your voters, now is
the time.
Sean Spicer today had some
pretty tough words,
reminding House Republicans of
all the -- quote
-- "free votes" they took to
repeal Obamacare,
knowing that President Obama
would veto those
bills. But now he said it's a
live ball. In
other words -- and this is my
interpretation
of Sean's words -- it's time to
put up or
shut up.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now, Lisa, in
the middle
of all of this, late this
afternoon, the Congressional
Budget Office has come out with
another calculation,
if you will, of the fiscal
impact of this
bill as it was being modified,
tweaked.
And it's interesting. The
numbers have just
as many people losing coverage,
and yet a
smaller decrease in the size of
the deficit.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
Essentially,
the CBO is saying that
Republicans with their
changes are spending more money.
They still
ultimately would shave a little
off the deficit,
about $150 billion, but that's
less than they
would have saved in their
initial version.
The CBO is saying, even though
the price tag
has gone up on this bill, there
are not more
people covered. Now, one reason
for that,
Judy -- this gets a little wonky
-- is the
way that the House did this,
they offered
a new tax deduction, but really
that money
is meant for the Senate to spend
later to
add coverage.
So, it may not -- it may be a
bit of a false
read. Either way, we know that
many millions
wouldn't be covered under this
Republican
health care bill.
And to pick up on something that
John was
saying, I talked to one
Republican here. This
is a test for the White House.
But Tom Cole
of Oklahoma, a deputy whip, told
me, this
is a test over whether
Republicans can move
from being an opposition party
to being a
governing party. He said, we
still have to
pass that test.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, finally,
John, what do
they say at the White House?
What is your
read on what is at stake for
them?
JOHN YANG: Well, there's a lot
at stake. Not
only is this the first
legislative initiative
on the president's part. Not
only does he
say this would clear the way for
tax -- the
tax cut legislation and the
infrastructure
legislation to come that he
promises this
year, but also this is a
president whose whole
image is based on success and
deal-making.
And if he fails on his first
time out, the
question is whether that image
is tarnished.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, all eyes
are on the places
where the two of you are
tonight. John Yang
at the White House, Lisa
Desjardins at the
Capitol, thank you both.
And in the day's other news:
British police
identified the man who drove a
car into pedestrians
near Parliament yesterday, and
fatally stabbed
a police officer, before being
shot to death
himself. Officials called it a
lone wolf attack.
Paul Davies of Independent
Television News
reports from London.
PAUL DAVIES: We know what he
did. We now know
his name. The man on the
stretcher, the man
who launched his own attack on
democracy yesterday
was Khalid Masood. He had been
living in the
West Midlands, where he hired
the car he used
as a lethal weapon. He was born
in Kent. The
so-called Islamic State say he
had become
one of their soldiers.
Today, because of his actions,
flags were
flying at half-mast over
Parliament, while
side-by-side a painstaking
investigation into
an act of terror was being
conducted, as the
workings of the democracy he had
come to hate
were continuing. The prime
minister left Downing
Street heading for the Commons
in a show of
business as usual.
THERESA MAY, British Prime
Minister: We are
not afraid. And our resolve will
never waiver
in the face of terrorism.
PAUL DAVIES: There has been a
huge and deliberate
effort to reflect life as normal
here, an
impression that's been supported
by the reopening
of the bridge that was the scene
of carnage
yesterday.
Aysha Frade, a 43-year-old who
worked at a
school in London, and Kirk
Cochran, a 54-year-old
American tourist, had been named
as the two
pedestrians knocked down and
killed yesterday.
Seven others who were injured by
the terrorist
car as it crossed Westminster
Bridge are still
said to be in critical
condition.
They include a Romanian woman
seen in this
footage falling into the Thames
as she tried
to avoid the vehicle. Last
night, police raided
properties in London, Wales and
here in Birmingham,
an operation that has continued
through today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This evening,
another victim
of the attack died of her
injuries.
In Israel, police arrested a
Jewish teenager
today, and said he's the main
suspect in dozens
of bomb threats against Jewish
community centers
in the U.S. The man also holds
U.S. citizenship.
He covered his face with a
sweatshirt at a
court hearing near Tel Aviv. His
lawyer said
he has behavioral problems.
GALIT BASH, Attorney: This is a
young person,
that because of his very, very
serious medical
condition, didn't serve in the
army, didn't
go to high school, and didn't go
to elementary
school. So, that is why the
medical condition
can actually affect the
investigation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's unclear what
the suspect's
motive might have been. His
identity is being
withheld by order of the court.
The chairman of the Intelligence
Committee
in the House of Representatives
apologized
today, after publicly
disclosing, and sharing
with the president, intelligence
intercepts
of the Trump transition team.
Devin Nunes
announced yesterday that these
occurred during
legal surveillance of foreign
nationals.
This and his briefing of the
president came
without first telling committee
Democrats.
Today, Nunes said it was a
judgment call.
But a Democrat on the committee,
California's
Jackie Speier, said that's not
enough.
REP. JACKIE SPEIER (D),
California: He just
apologized. He didn't specify
what his apology
was about. He knows full well
that there is
grave question about his
objectivity. And
I think over next few days,
we're going to
assess whether or not we feel
confident that
he can continue in that role.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Democrats accused
Nunes of
trying to give Mr. Trump cover
for unsubstantiated
claims that President Obama
wiretapped Trump
Tower. We will look into the
partisan fighting
over this, and what happens
next, after the
news summary.
Secretary of State Rex Tillerson
has told
U.S. embassies to begin extreme
vetting of
foreigners applying for visas.
Reuters quotes
diplomatic cables that ask U.S.
officials
to identify -- quote --
"populations warranting
increased scrutiny."
The report says Tillerson also
wants mandatory
social media checks for any
applicant who's
ever been in a territory
controlled by the
Islamic State group.
The U.N. Refugee Agency is
warning that the
worst is yet to come for Iraqis
in Western
Mosul. An estimated 400,000
civilians are
trapped in areas still
controlled by ISIS
fighters, as government troops
fight to recapture
the city. U.N. officials say
they're in desperate
need of food, medical aid and
basic supplies.
As many as 12,000 have been
fleeing each day.
Democrats in the U.S. Senate
served notice
today that they will try to
block confirmation
of Judge Neil Gorsuch to the
Supreme Court.
Minority Leader Chuck Schumer
went to the
Senate floor to announce his
opposition. He
also made clear that a
filibuster is coming.
SEN. CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY),
Minority Leader:
After careful deliberation, I
have concluded
that I cannot support Judge Neil
Gorsuch's
nomination to the Supreme Court.
His nomination
will have a cloture vote. He
will have to
earn 60 votes for confirmation.
My vote will
be no. And I urge my colleagues
to do the
same.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Under the current
rule, majority
Republicans would need to peel
off at least
eight Democrats to get to 60
votes. Or they
can scrap that rule, allowing
Gorsuch to be
confirmed by a simple majority.
Meanwhile, the judge's
confirmation hearings
wrapped up today, with lawyers,
advocacy groups
and others getting their say
about Gorsuch,
for and against.
And on Wall Street, the delay of
the health
care vote in the House wiped out
an early
rally. The Dow Jones industrial
average lost
four points to close at 20656.
The Nasdaq
fell about four, and the S&P 500
slipped two.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
calls for
an independent investigation
after the chair
of the House Intelligence
Committee apologizes
for going straight to the White
House; more
U.S. troops on the ground in
Syria; the potential
impact of the Republican health
care plan;
and much more.
We return now to the controversy
created by
allegations that were made by
the chairman
of the House Intelligence
Committee having
to do with surveillance of the
Trump transition.
Hari Sreenivasan has the story.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And for more
on all of this,
we turn to Matthew Rosenberg,
who has been
following this for The New York
Times.
Matthew, the Intelligence
Committees both
on the House and the Senate side
have been
one of these last bastions of
bipartisanship
and cooperation. What has been
happening in
the last 24 hours?
MATTHEW ROSENBERG, The New York
Times: Well,
first, we had Devin Nunes going
public with
information that people close to
Trump, he
had gleaned their names from
intercepts that
were passed around the previous
administration.
It was really unclear what
exactly he was
saying.
Then he went to the public. Then
he ran to
the White House to brief the
president before
he even told his own committee
members. And
for -- basically, for all the
Democrats on
the committee in the House, this
prompted
them to say, look, this
investigation is not
going to be independent. Mr.
Nunes is either
going to be a White House
surrogate or he's
going to run an independent
investigation.
And it really put into question
whether the
House could run an independent
investigation.
It also completely muddied the
waters. It
wasn't really clear what he was
talking about.
So, when intelligence is
gathered, if the
U.S., the NSA or CIA are
listening to a foreign
official, if an American is on
that, say,
calls them or an American is
discussed by
that official, that is called
incidental collection.
The American has been
incidentally swept up
into the intelligence gathering.
And when that intelligence is
then spread
to other parts of the
government, their name
and identity is supposed to be
obscured. It
is called masked or minimized.
And Nunes sort of suggested they
might have
been unmasked inappropriately.
But it's not
really clear. It is just -- it
is incredibly
confusing. That is part of the
problem here.
Today, Nunes went and apologized
to his committee
members, but the damage was
really done here.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Most of the
work of these
committees happens behind closed
doors, not
in front of cameras and
microphones. When
a piece of information comes to
the committee,
how does it usually work its way
through,
and what happened this time?
MATTHEW ROSENBERG: Well, what
tends to happen
is, the first thing they do is,
they brief
the rest of the committee on it.
And depending on what kind of
information
it is, it remains private. In
this case, this
is classified information. The
existence of
these intercepts is classified.
The contents
are obviously classified.
So, Nunes did two things here.
First, he didn't
even brief his fellow committee
members. He
just went out to the public and
then went
to the White House, which is, of
course, the
subject of this investigation.
And, at the same time, he
discussed classified
information publicly. And this
is a man who
has complained about leakers
extensively and
grilled the FBI director about
prosecuting
leakers.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There are
three different
types of alternatives that are
being proposed.
Some people ask for a special
prosecutor.
I think Senator Jack Reed was
calling for
that today. And then there are
folks that
say we need a 9/11-style special
commission.
And then there's also people who
say, well,
let's take a select committee
approach that
may be similar to what happened
with Benghazi.
What is the likelihood of any of
those three?
MATTHEW ROSENBERG: You know, at
this point,
everything I predict around here
doesn't go
right. So, I am hesitant to make
-- to kind
of put the odds on this one.
I think, you know, you are going
to have a
lot more Democrats pressing for
a truly independent
investigation, especially
because the FBI
is pursuing -- they're pursuing
their own
counterintelligence
investigation, but there
is a criminal element to that.
And I think there are a lot of
people on the
Hill who would like to have an
investigation
that could bring charges if
necessary.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What this done
to the tension
that exists between the two
leaders of the
committee? They have gone out of
their way
to make sure as this
investigation progressed
that this would be somewhat
cordial and that
they would be respectful of each
other trying
to get to the same end goal.
MATTHEW ROSENBERG: And that is
what was sort
of amazing about what happened
yesterday,
is that you are right. Mr.
Schiff -- Mr. Nunes
and his Democratic counterpart,
Adam Schiff,
had made this real show of
working together.
And even at Monday's hearing,
the body language
between the two of them was
incredibly positive.
And then, yesterday, it seemed
to just blow
up. And it is not really clear
exactly what
happened there or why. But it
does seem that
there is a real lasting damage
there.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There was
calls from Senator
McCain on the Republican side,
and I think
Joe Biden even tweeted where he
wrote, "Checks
and balances? Chair of committee
investigating
White House can't share info
with White House.
McCain is right. Need select
committee."
Is that gaining any momentum?
MATTHEW ROSENBERG: It's hard to
say right
now. The House has been deep
into the health
care bill over the last
day-and-a-half. The
Senate is obviously dealing with
the Gorsuch
nomination.
So, I think we're going to see
in the next
few days where this goes, as
those issues
fade and this issue comes back.
And there
are supposed to be more hearings
next week
by the House Intelligence
Committee.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Matthew Rosenberg
of The New York Times, thanks so
much.
MATTHEW ROSENBERG: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
betting on the
Trump presidency; exploring how
memories can
shape our present lives; and a
Brief But Spectacular
take on slam poetry.
But first: how the Republican
bill could change
insurance coverage and costs, if
its core
ideas become law.
Our team has traveled across the
country to
capture the stories and the
voices of those
who could be most impacted.
We have two of those profiles
tonight.
We start with the perspective of
a small business
owner and her employees in
Zanesville, Ohio.
She say she hopes that a new law
would offer
cheaper insurance options with
fewer required
benefits. That's been the source
of much debate
today, and is a possible element
in health
care's next act.
KELLY MOORE, Vice President, GKM
Auto Parts:
My name is Kelly Moore. And I am
the vice
president of GKM Auto Parts. We
operate as
a NAPA Auto Parts store.
Before the ACA, we offered full
insurance,
as far as meaning that we paid
at that point
80 percent of the premium. The
employees paid
20 percent of the premium. It
covered not
only their office cares and
their medical
and hospital, but also
prescription drug plan.
DARIN LAWLER, Manager: My name
is Darin Lawler.
I'm 51. I have been with the
company for around
seven years.
When I first got here, I had
insurance for
my family and I through the
company, you know,
relatively good insurance. We
had health care,
and we had dental. And it was
affordable.
KELLY MOORE: When the exchanges
opened, and
the Affordable Care Act came
into play, every
year, with the exception of one,
my insurance
went up double digits for the
first time ever.
We had mandates imposed on
everyone. And those
mandates made us cover things
that we wouldn't
normally be necessarily involved
in. Suddenly,
we are having to cover things
like pregnancy
and other conditions that my
folks may not
need the coverage on.
And so because we're having to
share that
mandate with everyone, our
coverage had to
go up. We had to scale back our
premium portion
from 80 percent to 70 percent
and then to
60 percent in order to afford
it.
It got to the point for us as a
company that
it was no longer a benefit for
the employees.
DARIN LAWLER: We were forced to
go on our
own, and it's -- affordable care
isn't very
affordable. At this point right
now, my family
and I do not have insurance
because of the
act.
And we're actively searching,
but we just
have not come up with anything
that we can
afford at this point.
KELLY MOORE: It was
gut-wrenching to make
that decision, to pull that
trigger. I lost
sleep. I did everything I could.
I spent most
of my time at my desk, not doing
the other
duties of my job, but rather
trying to crunch
numbers to find a way to offer
that insurance
benefit.
DARIN LAWLER: You could see it
in her eyes.
And she just -- just kind of the
way she talked.
Just, it was upsetting to her.
And, you know,
it would be, because they have
always -- you
know, that was one of the
things. We had decent
benefits here. And that was one
of the things
that they can't do for us
anymore, and, you
know, it was hard on her.
KELLY MOORE: I hope that the
government steps
back a little more from the
business of offering
health care. I would like to see
health care
traded across state lines, the
way we do auto
insurance, the way we can get
our business
insurance. I would like to see
fewer mandates
on the program.
I would love to offer insurance
again, when
it becomes affordable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Affordability is
clearly a
big issue in the debate over the
health care
replacement.
But so is the question of who's
covered. The
Republican bill would end the
expansion of
Medicaid over time, and would
phase out government
coverage for millions of people.
We visited a current Medicaid
recipient in
Shreveport, Louisiana, who got
coverage because
of the Affordable Care Act and
is now worried
about what may happen.
JULIA RAYE, Medicaid Expansion
Patient: My
name is Julia Raye. I'm 50 years
old, and
I live in Shreveport, Louisiana.
I have been unemployed for about
a year now,
and I will be starting a new job
in April
at a nonprofit. And while I was
unemployed,
I have relied solely on Medicaid
expansions,
and for my health conditions
with diabetes
and seizures.
I am a chemist by degree, and I
have worked
for the CDC. I have worked for
EPA. I have
worked for FDA. And I never
planned to not
work, but then there have been
situations
in my life where the contractor,
the job ended,
and I needed insurance.
There was a time when I didn't
have any health
care coverage. I use two types
of insulin,
and I would take the needles. I
would rinse
them out with alcohol, and then
I would reuse
the needles. And I remember
thinking, am I
getting the right dosage?
Obamacare allowed me to get
medicine for whatever
illness it was I had. And,
without it, I wouldn't
be healthy enough to even have a
job.
Medicaid has been frustrating at
times. The
issues are, in some cases, there
might not
be a doctor that takes Medicaid
or that situation.
But make no mistake. It is -- it
is a blessing
to have Medicaid, and to be
medically assisted
by Medicaid.
As I hear the news about the
changes in Medicaid
for the future, I am very
excited about my
new job. But the job is, in all
essence, a
contract position. At some point
in time,
it may be that I -- this job
closes down,
and I find myself needing
insurance.
I am worried that, what happens
if I have
no income, and that puts me at a
point where
I need Medicaid again? I mean,
at this point,
do I take the medicine that I
get now or that
I get in the future, and do I,
instead of
taking all my medicine, do I
take two of the
three pills I'm supposed to
take, and start
stockpiling it, so that -- you
know, for a
rainy day?
You know, people have stockpiles
of food for
possible war. Do I stockpile my
medicine in
case I don't have it?
I went to the hospital three
times in one
year with sugars above 600,
because they were
not -- I wasn't taking the right
medication.
If you don't think that Medicaid
is important,
then you're signing my death
sentence. If
you're comfortable with that,
then go right
ahead.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We are going to
have more of
these profiles of how people
could be impacted
by the new health care plan in
the days to
come.
You can watch all of them on our
Web site
right now at PBS.org/NewsHour.
You can watch all of them on our
Web site
right now at PBS.org/NewsHour.
United States military
involvement in Syria
has deepened since President
Trump took office.
The Pentagon has authorized the
deployment
of 400 more troops, some of whom
are already
there. Five hundred special
operations forces
sent by the Obama administration
are also
on the ground. War planners
reportedly are
seeking to send an additional
1,000 American
troops to Syria.
Yesterday, in Tabqa, Syria,
American forces
aided Syrian rebel and Kurdish
forces in the
taking a strategic dam and road
from ISIS.
All this comes on a complex
battlefield and
under the wary eye of Syria's
northern neighbor
Turkey.
For more on what's happening now
and what
may come, I'm joined by Andrew
Exum. He served
in the Obama administration
until this January
as deputy assistant secretary of
defense for
Middle East policy. He's also a
former Army
Ranger and a contributing editor
at "The Atlantic."
And Bulent Aliriza, he's the
director of the
Turkey Project at the Center for
Strategic
and International Studies. It's
a Washington
think tank.
And we welcome both of you back
to the program.
Andrew Exum, to you first.
How much of a change is what we
are seeing
right now in Syria from what was
going on
in the Obama administration?
ANDREW EXUM, Former U.S. Deputy
Assistant
Secretary of Defense: So,
significant in one
way. Significant in terms of the
numbers.
It is clear that the Trump
administration
doesn't have the same reticence
that the Obama
administration did in terms of
putting more
boots on the ground, especially
conventional
troops, as opposed to special
operations troops.
Where it is similar is that what
we are trying
to do, it seems, is replicate
the success
we have had in Iraq working, by,
with and
through local forces, so no
direct combat
themselves, but really enabling
local forces
to try to win the fight.
It seems what the U.S. military
is trying
to do is put the same
infrastructure on the
ground that has proved
successful in helping
the Iraqi army in Mosul in Syria
to help the
Syrians successfully take Raqqa.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, if the Trump
administration
seems to be headed toward 2,000,
assuming
this next 1,000 contingent gets
there, is
that where the Obama
administration would
have eventually gotten, or is
that not even
clear?
ANDREW EXUM: So, it's a really
good question.
Over the past 18 months, we have
steadily
ramped up our commitment in
terms of resources
to both Iraq and Syria, and
certainly, as
the fight developed in Iraq, we
continued
to put more troop there, for
example, building
up the Qayyarah West Airfield in
presentation
for the fight against Mosul.
So, you could say the Obama
administration
might have eventually done
something similar
to this. We really don't know.
In some ways,
this is typical of the ramping
up of the strategy
so far.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Bulent Aliriza,
do you see
in as a continuation or as
something tangibly
different?
BULENT ALIRIZA, Center for
Strategic and International
Studies: It is a combination,
exactly as Andrew
says.
It is a continuation in the
sense that the
Obama administration was relying
on the Syrian
Kurds, the YPG, which causes
terribly tremendous
heartburn in the context of the
Syrian Democratic
forces. The difference is that,
in Iraq, the
U.S. is relying on the Iraqi
army, supplemented
with Peshmerga Kurdish forces.
In this case, the primary
reliance on the
Syrian Kurds, with lots and lots
and complications.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, expand a
little bit,
Bulent Aliriza, on why the
Turkish government
is so concerned about -- or
growing concerned?
BULENT ALIRIZA: The Turkish
government regards
the YPG, the fighting arm of the
Syrian Kurdish
party the PYD, as an extension
of the PKK,
which has been fighting Turkey
for over three
decades.
With the Obama administration
and subsequently
with the Trump administration,
Turkey tried
to persuade the U.S. not to rely
on the Syrian
Kurds for this reason, and to
actually look
to opposition groups backed by
Turkey who
have actually moved into
Northern Syria with
Turkish backing recently, and
maybe even the
Turkish army to take Raqqa.
But it seems that the Obama
administration's
recommendation, which was
reviewed by the
Pentagon, has led the Trump
administration
to continue with the Syrian
Kurdish option.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, as far as you
know, Andrew
Exum, how does the -- you know
how the Obama
administration viewed Turkey's
concerns. What
does it look like the Trump
administration,
how do they see these concerns
by Turkey?
ANDREW EXUM: Yes.
No, my colleague sketched out
exactly right.
We actually started meeting with
the Turks
in the summer of 2015 to try to
see if there
was any way to make use of these
opposition
forces that Turkey had
identified.
The bottom line is that there
are too few
of them and they weren't
combat-ready in the
same way that our other partners
were ready.
And the Turkish military was
never on the
table during the Obama
administration, although,
of course, Turkey committed its
own forces
into Northern Syria late in the
day in the
administration.
Unclear how this administration
looks at it.
I think they had been trying to
see if there
was some way they could do this
without angering
a NATO partner in Turkey. And
this may be
why they're putting more U.S.
forces on the
ground, so that they don't have
to provide
the same type of equipment to
the YPG they
might have to -- had to have
otherwise done
if they had been trying to do
this with fewer
U.S. forces.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Bulent
Aliriza, as you
look, as you step back and look
at this, does
it look like the Trump
administration is making
a smart move here in the way
they are handling
this?
BULENT ALIRIZA: I think their
primary motivation
here is to try and live up to
the commitment
that Trump made during the
campaign, to actually
deal with ISIS as quickly as
possible.
And, in this case, the Syrian
Kurds offered
the best option in order to get
this done
as soon as possible. Beyond
that, I think
there are going to be lots and
lots of complications,
but, frankly, this is where we
are. And nobody
is really thinking beyond the
takeover of
Raqqa from ISIL.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You assess it the
same way?
ANDREW EXUM: I do.
I think the problems really
begin in some
ways after you take Raqqa,
because it is clear
that the Islamic State is going
to retreat
to Deir el-Zour. The regime has
a strong toehold
in Deir el-Zour. So I think the
key questions
going forward is, do you follow
Da'esh to
Deir el-Zour? Do you try to work
with the
regime in Russia?
I think the geography only gets
more complicated
the farther south you go.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what about --
Bulent Aliriza,
what about -- to both of you,
what about once
ISIS is cleared out? Is there a
plan for what
to do with those spaces that are
vacated,
that are emptied out?
BULENT ALIRIZA: Well, the Syrian
government
under Bashar Assad seems to have
survived.
Initially, the Obama
administration, like
Turkey and many other countries,
was committed
to his ouster. With Russian
backing, with
Iranian backing, they have
survived.
But in this process, ISIL
emerged and began
to be the problem within Syria
and beyond
that it has. Now, even if you
take Raqqa,
even if you take Mosul across
the border in
Iraq, unfortunately, the problem
posed by
radical jihadists is going to
continue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Which spells --
go ahead.
ANDREW EXUM: I think that is
right.
I think that, unfortunately, I
think that
we have already put our U.S.
special operators
in a very difficult position in
Northern Syria
already. You can see them
refereeing between
the Turkish-aligned forces and
U.S.-backed
forces.
I have real concerns about their
ability to
enable local forces to not just
seize Raqqa,
but then to hold Raqqa. And what
is unclear
to me is, what is the endgame?
How do we eventually
exfiltrate U.S. forces out of a
very complicated
situation in Northern Syria,
once we have
defeated the Islamic State?
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, for folks who
are watching
this, Bulent Aliriza, and they
are wondering,
OK, what are the risks that the
Trump administration
is taking, how would you
describe them?
BULENT ALIRIZA: Well, the risks
in Syria to
the U.S., to the Trump
administration are
minimal. It is the risks beyond
Syria posed
by ISIL and other organizations
like that.
And so dealing with them in
Syria, as I said,
is relatively easy. But it might
actually
make the difficulties posed by
the radical
jihadists beyond Syria's borders
even more
intractable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And in just a few
words, you
see it the same way?
ANDREW EXUM: Well, I think what
the United
States is going to try to do
after this is,
we have figured out a way to
squeeze Da'esh
from multiple directions in Iraq
and Syria.
I know our military planners are
now thinking
through, what does that mean on
a global scale?
How do you avoid exactly the
situation that
my colleague is describing?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Making it much
worse elsewhere,
once you get rid of them, so to
speak.
ANDREW EXUM: Exactly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: If that happens
in Syria.
Andrew Exum, Bulent Aliriza, we
thank you
both.
BULENT ALIRIZA: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
is not only
dominating the news here in the
United States.
His agenda, and his style of
governing, is
even the subject of betting
markets, of all
things.
Our economics correspondent,
Paul Solman,
recently traveled to Dublin to
meet with Ireland's
most visible bookie about all
things Trump.
It's part of our weekly series
Making Sense.
PAUL SOLMAN: So how is the Trump
action?
PADDY POWER, Paddy Power: Pretty
nonstop.
I mean, he is literally top
story in the news
every single night, still.
PAUL SOLMAN: The political
prediction markets,
where you can bet real money on
an almost
endless variety of political
outcomes. Well,
the betting is heavier than ever
these days
On Donald Trump.
Even here in Ireland?
PADDY POWER: Even here in
Ireland.
PAUL SOLMAN: That's Paddy Power
of the eponymous
Irish online betting site Paddy
Power, a legal
bookmaker which took a very
visible million-dollar
loss this fall when it paid off
on bets for
Hillary Clinton, an 85 percent
favorite, to
win the presidency, 20 days
before Donald
Trump won.
PADDY POWER: We decided to pay
out on Clinton
early, and we got that
completely wrong, obviously.
So, got Brexit completely wrong.
PAUL SOLMAN: Now we have been
covering various
political prediction markets as
a successful
example of applied economics
since the 2004
Bush-Kerry presidential
campaign, when we
featured New Yorker economics
columnist James
Surowiecki on the sidewalks of
New York crowdsourcing
a guesstimate of the number of
jelly beans
in this jar.
WOMAN: Five hundred.
MAN: How many did you say?
WOMAN: Ten thousand.
PAUL SOLMAN: Ten thousand.
As wildly divergent as the
guesses were, their
average was eerily close to the
real number,
1,350.
Surowiecki was touting the
so-called wisdom
of crowds, the theoretical
advantage of markets
and their supposed collective
best guesses,
which we cover here with the
usual stock footage.
And he cited the historical
accuracy of the
Iowa Electronic Markets, which
have allowed
political betting, for research
purposes,
since 1988.
JAMES SUROWIECKI, "The New
Yorker": Historically,
the election eve forecast in
this market has
only been off by 1.4 percent,
which is better
than any poll.
PAUL SOLMAN: Better than any
poll. That's
been the track record of all the
prediction
markets pretty much forever.
Study them, said
market expert David Rothschild
during last
year's campaign:
DAVID ROTHSCHILD, PredictWise:
And you see
something that is more accurate
than any collection
of pundits or statistical
polling averages,
and extremely well-calibrated.
PAUL SOLMAN: But what's
remarkable is that,
even though prediction markets
failed so spectacularly
on Trump, bettors are flocking
to them as
never before. That's why I asked
Paddy Power
for a quick chat in downtown
Dublin.
PADDY POWER: We have actually
launched a new
betting hub, purely dedicated to
Trump.
PAUL SOLMAN: A betting hub?
PADDY POWER: Yes, literally a
micro-site,
a Trump micro-site.
PAUL SOLMAN: A Trump micro-site?
And so how
many bets can you make on Trump?
PADDY POWER: There's 100 open
bets on Trump,
different markets on Trump at
the moment.
The politics trader literally
can't handle
the volume, so we're hiring a
Trump betting
expert at the moment.
PAUL SOLMAN: That's because,
when it offers
a bet like next member of the
Trump administration
to resign or get sacked -- it's
Jeff Sessions
at 2- 1 -- Paddy Power needs an
expert to
set the opening odds. If they're
too far away
from what bettors are likely to
think, Paddy
could lose its shirt.
PADDY POWER: We're advertising
for some kid
out of college, hopefully, a
political graduate
or whatever, to become an expert
on Trump,
all things Trump. They're going
to manage
our Trump betting, because it's
literally
millions of dollars.
PAUL SOLMAN: What are the odds
of him being
impeached, not convicted, but
impeached before
four years? Is that the bet?
PADDY POWER: Yes. That's the
bet. That's the
main bet, the most popular one.
At the moment,
he's 6-4, and that means he's
about 40 percent
likely. The odds would suggest
it's 40 percent
likely he's impeached in his
first term, yes.
PAUL SOLMAN: So what's an
odds-on favorite
at this point with regard to
Trump, that is
more than 50 percent likely,
according to
the prediction markets, to
happen?
PADDY POWER: Well, it's more
than 50 percent
likely that he won't see a
second term, right?
It's more than 50 percent that
he's going
to see his first term out,
though, that he
will get there in the end.
PAUL SOLMAN: Power showed me the
latest odds
on some of the other Trump bets
as well.
Two-thirds chance that he will
start building
the wall.
PADDY POWER: In 2017.
PAUL SOLMAN: In 2017.
PADDY POWER: Yes.
PAUL SOLMAN: But you need to
consult the Web
site itself for the very latest
odds.
On Mexico, funding the wall.
When will Sean
Spicer leave or get sacked as
White House
press secretary? U.S. Congress
inquiry to
officially declare that Obama
ordered a wiretap
of phones in Trump Tower.
It's the Irish, like those
walking past us
on Grafton Street, making real
money Trump
bets and presumably taking the
odds seriously.
But there's no reason at this
point, is there,
for me or anybody in the
audience to believe
these odds?
PADDY POWER: No, absolutely not.
We have been
wrong, so wrong.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, why have
prediction markets
failed as abysmally as they
have?
PADDY POWER: I think -- I have
been thinking
about this a lot, because it is
-- it is a
head-scratcher.
PAUL SOLMAN: But Mr. Power does
have a theory.
PADDY POWER: We're just behind.
The world
is slowly going bonkers, all
around the world,
because you can see the way the
political
structure is just changing
everywhere.
I think it's just taking us a
bit of time
to catch up with that, because
we still look
at -- like, we look at form.
Like, in sports
betting, you look at form and
what's happened
before.
PAUL SOLMAN: Is this a horse
that generally
wins?
PADDY POWER: Yes, exactly, or if
this team
always wins at home or whatever
it might be.
And when you look at the form,
like that's
literally ripped up and thrown
out the window
on this occasion, you know?
PAUL SOLMAN: Or, with Donald
Trump, and so
many other political phenomena
these days,
if you will forgive the rather
obvious cliche,
all bets are off.
Economics correspondent Paul
Solman, reporting
for the "PBS NewsHour" from
Grafton Street
in Dublin, Ireland.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: how memories
can shape
a life.
That's the lens through which a
new memoir
unfolds.
Jeffrey Brown has the latest add
to the "NewsHour"
Bookshelf. And it's from a
member of our extended
family.
JEFFREY BROWN: For years,
Elizabeth Farnsworth
traveled the world as a foreign
correspondent
for the "NewsHour" to hot spots
such as Vietnam,
Iran, Iraq, and Latin America.
ELIZABETH FARNSWORTH, Author, "A
Train Through
Time: A Life, Real and
Imagined": I very much
wanted to be reporting where a
lot was on
the line. I think -- you may
share this -- I
think that that's what reporters
like to do
and want to do, and where it's
really important
that you get the story that's
the truth.
JEFFREY BROWN: She's written
about this in
a new book, "A Train Through
Time."
ELIZABETH FARNSWORTH: I'm
somewhat obsessed
with the disappeared. I had
worked in Chile,
and I know people that were
disappeared.
And the book is partly about
people who you
don't know what happened to
them. And I think
I want people to pay attention
when other
people are suffering. When
people die, I think
I really care that people pay
attention to
that.
I was so lucky to get to work in
a way that
I could call attention. When I
first reported
from Chile or reported from
Guatemala, a lot
of people didn't realize what
was happening.
And I was so lucky to be able to
say, pay
attention to this.
JEFFREY BROWN: But this is more
than a story
of her reporting. It's also
about her childhood
in Kansas, and dealing with the
loss of her
mother when Elizabeth was age 9.
Soon after her mother's death,
she took a
train ride with her father on
the Union Pacific's
Portland Rose from Topeka to San
Francisco,
which becomes the spine of her
new book.
ELIZABETH FARNSWORTH: Her death
was a mystery.
I didn't know that she really
was dead. They
didn't use the word: She died.
She's gone.
We don't have her anymore.
She'd been sick. But, in those
days, I have
what I call very good bad luck,
in that I
had a wonderful father,
wonderful aunts, grandparents,
but they didn't think to ever
tell me that
my mother was dying of cancer.
And the fact that they didn't
tell me that
made me believe that she
disappeared. And
so I looked for her from that
train, and I
think that that's part of
solving the mystery.
Why did I look for her? Why is
that memory
so vivid?
JEFFREY BROWN: You know, we have
been friends
a long time, but I realized in
this that I
don't know how much you tend to
look back
at your young self. And I
wondered, when you
did, what did you see? Who was
that person?
Does it feel like the same you,
or...
ELIZABETH FARNSWORTH: Yes, it
does very much.
It's interesting you should ask
that, Jeff.
It does.
And it has partly to do, I
think, with losing
a parent. I think it -- I think,
in my experience,
it made you both empathetic with
people who
are losing something. But I also
think it
makes you tremendously
appreciative of life,
because the person most
important to you,
her life was so fragile.
And so I see a person who had
some sadness,
but who also wanted to live life
to the fullest,
and that pretty much is who I am
now too.
JEFFREY BROWN: One of the other
themes here,
of course, is the passage of
time, right?
And you even refer to you as a
young girl
on the train, when you're
saying, does it
change depending on how fast
we're going,
that metaphor of the train
again, right? The
train's going so fast.
ELIZABETH FARNSWORTH: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: What time will it
be?
ELIZABETH FARNSWORTH: Yes. Will
we get ahead
of time?
I'm sort of fascinated by time
in general.
And I think listeners will share
this. I think
we all have moments when we're
living in about
four times at once, when
something reminds
us of something or when we
realize we're reacting
to something because it comes
from that past
time.
JEFFREY BROWN: The train ride
amidst great
loss is the touchstone for one
of her biggest
concerns as a reporter, the role
of fixers,
the local producers who help us
do our work,
sometimes at great risk to
themselves.
One man in particular, Fakher
Haider, worked
with Elizabeth in Iraq. He was
later killed
while working with another news
organization.
ELIZABETH FARNSWORTH: I realized
in about
-- it started really in about
2000, before
9/11, but really after 9/11,
when I spent
quite a lot of time in the
Middle East, that
the shoots that we were on were
far more dangerous
for the cameraman, the soundman
and the fixer
than for me and for the
producer.
And there are reasons for that.
It has to
do partly with having a camera,
which means
that it looks like a gun
sometimes. We had
people point guns at us because
they thought
that we had a gun.
And then fixers are local people
who interpret
and do a lot more for us too.
And we all are
probably going to get helped in
going back
home if something bad happens.
JEFFREY BROWN: You have
somewhere to go to.
ELIZABETH FARNSWORTH: Yes. And
the fixer doesn't.
And I won't take the time here,
but I could
tell you stories of ways in
which correspondents
hurt fixers by not being
sensitive to them.
And that is not what happened
with Fakher.
People were quite sensitive to
him. But he
was such a good reporter and
doing such great
work, did great work for us. He
did great
work for The New York Times.
And, as I say in the book, he
joined the ghosts
that wake me up at night
sometimes.
JEFFREY BROWN: There is an
interesting blend
of fact -- that's all we're
talking about
here -- and fiction, of deeply
reported events
and your imagination.
And I wonder how you thought
about that line.
ELIZABETH FARNSWORTH: It's
funny. I asked
Jim Lehrer about it. Can I do
this?
And he said, as long as you tell
people what
the fiction is.
And that's what I do in the
afterward.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
ELIZABETH FARNSWORTH: I think,
any time you
remember something, one can
write a memoir
-- and I know people that have
done this -- that
everything is researched. You
don't say anything
just from memory.
But I didn't want to do that,
because part
of what I was trying to do was
recover the
imagination that created who I
am now. I was
very imaginative as a child, and
I wanted
to see what it was that I
thought about my
mother's death, not what the
facts were.
I could've gone to try to find
the medical
records. But I wanted to be in
her mind. And
I understand that you take
chances when you
start. I started imaging this on
the train
in a certain way, which we won't
reveal, and
certain things happened on the
train which
are a mystery.
And I just went with it. And I
do explain
that that part isn't true. And I
think that
there's a reason why I did go
with it and
the role it plays in the book.
And we will
let other people decide what
they think.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, as you say,
memory and
imagination are closely linked.
You just decided
to allow the linkage to happen.
ELIZABETH FARNSWORTH: I think of
imagination
as really a way of seeing things
that you
cannot see any other way.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, the
book is "A Train
Through Time."
Elizabeth Farnsworth, thank you
very much.
ELIZABETH FARNSWORTH: Thanks,
Jeff.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we are so
proud of our
former colleague Elizabeth.
You can watch Matthew Moyer's
tribute to Fakher
Haider. That's online at
PBS.org/NewsHour.
Finally, another in our Brief
But Spectacular
series, where we ask interesting
people to
describe their passions.
Tonight, we hear from artist
Jive Poetic.
The New York-based poet will be
coaching the
Brooklyn Poetry Slam finals next
month.
JIVE POETIC, Artist: Rule number
one: Always
know it is time to go home.
Summer camp was
free lunch in a park, then back
home, trip
to Manhattan, then back home.
No matter where you were, if
those street
lights came on, and you was not
home, there
was a problem. If mama had to
look for you,
if community got involved a
problem, a problem.
And solutions never came easy.
We still have not solved what
happened to
little Tasha (ph). And mama used
to say, be
aware of emergency vehicles,
police cars,
sirens, screams, cries, tears.
All emergency
vehicles, be aware of how far
away they are,
how fast and far close, closer,
how close
that close far was too late.
They're tardy.
Always made us the most almost
riots. Always
made them the most almost
panicked. Always
enter their Cavalier with middle
finger and
curse words spoken and thrown by
the dialect.
Always raged into flames, as if
our bodies
were built from the kiss of
match and gas
can, because we have not
forgotten.
We have not forgotten. We have
not forgotten
Carmela Stevenson (ph) was alive
when them
sirens came, dead when
negligence dropped
her from gurney to sidewalk. And
mama used
to say, distraction will get you
killed.
Pay attention to your
environment. Pay attention
to your environment. You too
have instincts
for a reason. Use them. Use them
like childhood
street lights. They will always
tell you when
it is time to go home.
If you think you know how your
poem is going
to end, then you're not going to
have a poem,
because the poem is going to
want to do something
else. And you're going to be
stuck going one
way.
I don't carry any notebooks.
What I will do
is, I will throw a line down. I
will type
it up. And I will walk. I will
walk through
whole of Brooklyn. I will walk
from Bed-Stuy
to Flatbush. I walk back to the
bridge.
And that's the thing with living
in New York
City, where I can say these
poems out loud
by myself at night, and nobody
thinks you're
crazy. The things that I say in
my poems are
things that I have absolutely
have to say.
I know that there are kids who
grew up like
I grew up, from where I'm from,
and they aren't
always aware that their voice
matters. I think
it matters. It matters to me.
And hopefully
it will matter to somebody else.
But there's a lot of systems
designed to try
and silence me anyway. There's
no point of
me surrendering my voice. That's
-- why would
I want to do that? Surrender
your voice? You
fought too hard to have one.
My name is Jive Poetic, my Brief
But Spectacular
take on things I have to say.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You can watch
more Brief But
Spectacular videos online at
PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: Plenty
of classical composers have
turned to nature
for inspiration, but we meet a
composer who's
been inspired by the national
parks in the
U.S. like Yosemite and Mesa
Verde. That's
on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Friday, analysis of another
full week in
politics with Mark Shields and
David Brooks.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening. For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and we will see you
soon.